good_old_relativity.md, before:

- S: So what is so special about the speed of light? It seems that the idea that something could go faster than light had created an uproar in the physics community.
- M: Oh it did. The fact that nothing goes faster than light is believed to be a very important principle of physics.
- M: This is one of the things that Einstein is famous for and it is a surprisingly fun and simple thing to explain.
- S: All right, I am ready for it... relativity.

## Old Relativity

First, let's start with the old notion of relativity that Galileo and Newton came up with a long time ago.

<iframe src="https://h5p.org/h5p/embed/82389" width="1090" height="481" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen"></iframe><script src="https://h5p.org/sites/all/modules/h5p/library/js/h5p-resizer.js" charset="UTF-8"></script>

These observations lead Galileo and Newton to formulate the principle of relativity.

> _The laws of mechanics are the same for all observers moving at constant velocity._

We will see the laws of mechanics, briefly, in the next week. We will not discuss them very much since these laws have changed a bit since Galileo and Newton. But the idea was that the laws of mechanics were telling you how you move when a force (a push or pull) is exerted on you. Since Newton and Galileo observed (experimentally) that objects seem to move with no push or pull when they are accelerated, they came up with this principle of relativity that the laws of mechanics only work for observers moving at constant velocity.

This is a powerful statement. It says that the laws of mechanics are the same everywhere in the Universe (independent of location). They were the same in the past and will be the same in the future. They only seem to fail when an object is not moving at a constant velocity.

> With the work of Newton, we have figured out "how" the laws fail when an observer is accelerating, and we can "correct" Newton's law so that it still works. The point is that the laws of physics are unchanged if the observer moves at a constant velocity but are changed if the observer accelerate.

Galileo and Newton were pretty pleased with themselves. But then came a new theory, the theory of electricity, discovered by many people and synthesized by James Clerk Maxwell. This complicated mechanical laws, if you can believe it.

We will discuss the theory of electricity later on, but, for now, there is only one thing we need to know: the theory of electricity predicts that light is a wave moving with a speed of

<lrn-math> c = 299,792,458 \; m/s</lrn-math>, the speed of light.

> the symbol "c" always means the speed of light (in a vacuum). 

- S: I do not see what is so strange here? Beside the fact that I don't see what light and electricity have to do with each other.
- M: What is strange is that for the first time, a fundamental law of Nature was telling us specifically the speed of a wave. The speed was not an arbitrary derived quantity, it was right there in the equations.
- S: So in which way is the speed of light more fundamental than the speed of sound?
- M: The speed of sound is like the speed of your car. It is not a fundamental quantity of Nature. You can change it at will (you can change the speed of sound by heating up the gas for example). The laws of mechanics don't say anywhere that your car should move at 40 mph or that sound travels at 340 m/s.
- S: I see... Is there any other law of nature that predicts a speed of something else?
- M: Yes some others. Einstein's theory of gravity (general relativity) predicts gravitational waves and it predicts their speed. Also neutrinos have their speed predicted.
- S: So what is the prediction for the speed of gravitational waves or neutrinos?
- M: It is <lrn-math> c = 299,792,458 \; m/s</lrn-math>, the speed of light.
- S: Hmmm, I guess there is really something special about that number.
- M: There is. The speed of light is really a _property of spacetime_. It is the speed limit. And Nature is very good at enforcing this speed limit.

Commit message:

Updated node 437 updated in CMS by user krp15

good_old_relativity.md, after:

- S: So what is so special about the speed of light? It seems that the idea that something could go faster than light had created an uproar in the physics community.
- M: Oh it did. The fact that nothing goes faster than light is believed to be a very important principle of physics.
- M: This is one of the things that Einstein is famous for and it is a surprisingly fun and simple thing to explain.
- S: All right, I am ready for it... relativity.

## Old Relativity

First, let's start with the old notion of relativity that Galileo and Newton came up with a long time ago.

[ciscode|rev=1|tool=elmsmedia|item=5177|entity_type=node|render=display_mode|display_mode=h5p]

These observations lead Galileo and Newton to formulate the principle of relativity.

> _The laws of mechanics are the same for all observers moving at constant velocity._

We will see the laws of mechanics, briefly, in the next week. We will not discuss them very much since these laws have changed a bit since Galileo and Newton. But the idea was that the laws of mechanics were telling you how you move when a force (a push or pull) is exerted on you. Since Newton and Galileo observed (experimentally) that objects seem to move with no push or pull when they are accelerated, they came up with this principle of relativity that the laws of mechanics only work for observers moving at constant velocity.

This is a powerful statement. It says that the laws of mechanics are the same everywhere in the Universe (independent of location). They were the same in the past and will be the same in the future. They only seem to fail when an object is not moving at a constant velocity.

> With the work of Newton, we have figured out "how" the laws fail when an observer is accelerating, and we can "correct" Newton's law so that it still works. The point is that the laws of physics are unchanged if the observer moves at a constant velocity but are changed if the observer accelerate.

Galileo and Newton were pretty pleased with themselves. But then came a new theory, the theory of electricity, discovered by many people and synthesized by James Clerk Maxwell. This complicated mechanical laws, if you can believe it.

We will discuss the theory of electricity later on, but, for now, there is only one thing we need to know: the theory of electricity predicts that light is a wave moving with a speed of

<lrn-math> c = 299,792,458 \; m/s</lrn-math>, the speed of light.

> the symbol "c" always means the speed of light (in a vacuum).

- S: I do not see what is so strange here? Beside the fact that I don't see what light and electricity have to do with each other.
- M: What is strange is that for the first time, a fundamental law of Nature was telling us specifically the speed of a wave. The speed was not an arbitrary derived quantity, it was right there in the equations.
- S: So in which way is the speed of light more fundamental than the speed of sound?
- M: The speed of sound is like the speed of your car. It is not a fundamental quantity of Nature. You can change it at will (you can change the speed of sound by heating up the gas for example). The laws of mechanics don't say anywhere that your car should move at 40 mph or that sound travels at 340 m/s.
- S: I see... Is there any other law of nature that predicts a speed of something else?
- M: Yes some others. Einstein's theory of gravity (general relativity) predicts gravitational waves and it predicts their speed. Also neutrinos have their speed predicted.
- S: So what is the prediction for the speed of gravitational waves or neutrinos?
- M: It is <lrn-math> c = 299,792,458 \; m/s</lrn-math>, the speed of light.
- S: Hmmm, I guess there is really something special about that number.
- M: There is. The speed of light is really a _property of spacetime_. It is the speed limit. And Nature is very good at enforcing this speed limit.
